ACM Digital Library

ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society
Volume 32, Number 7 (2004)
Hacking into Hacking: Gender and the Hacker Phenomenon
A. E. Adam
Information Systems Research Centre, University of Salford, Salford M5
4WT, UK
Tel: +44 161 295 3125
a.adam@salford.ac.uk <mailto:a.adam@salford.ac.uk>

Abstract

Women hackers, and whether there are any, has proved to be an endlessly
fascinating topic. This paper explores the gender dimension s of hacking
in terms of the male domination of hacking, the presence or absence of
women hackers, the influence of the frontier metaphor and especially "
frontier masculinity." Central tenets of the "hacker ethic" are examined
including whether hacker communities are more egalitarian than other
communiti es, the equal opportunities, freedom of information and work
ethics of the hacker ethic. Whilst these are all problematic in gender
terms there are hints that a female version of the hacker ethic is
emerging amongst women hackers which is more explicitly political in
motivation.

Keywords

women hackers, the hacker ethic, frontier masculinity, feminist ethics

INTRODUCTION


Although gender as an analytical tool has begun to emerge as a fruitful
area for research within computer ethics in recent years (Adam 2001a,
2001b) there is a need for more exploration of computer ethics topics in
terms of gendered relations within the context of a feminist analysis;
this is particularly important for topics where there is an implicit
gender dimensi on which may be as yet underexplored. The chosen topic
for this essay is the hack ing phenomenon. In what follows, an analysis
of hacking is elaborated in terms of a discussion of the male domination
of hacking, an examination of the interest generated in the presence or
absence of women hackers, and a consideration of the influence of the
frontier metaphor and "frontier masculinity." A number of tenets central
to the "hacker ethic" are explored, in order to render their gender
dimension more visible, and to question whether the hacker ethic serves
men and women equally well. These include the question of whether hacker
communities are more egalitarian than other communities, and the equal
opportunities, freedom of information and work ethics of the hacker
ethic. Whilst these are all problematic, there are some hints that a
female version of the hacker ethic might be emerging where women hackers
are making a conscious political stand through their hacking activities.
A great deal has been written on the business of hacking; it excites
much inte rest in the media and has also been subject to academic
scrutiny (Taylor, 1999). It is not the intention of this essay to
approve or disapprove of hacking acti vities, nor to argue the merits of
definitional statements on hacking made by those involved in hacker
activities and by others (Raymond, 2001). Nevertheless it is clearly
useful to recognize that some commentators are anxious to distingui sh
between those whose activities fall under the banner of "enthusiast
progr ammer", within the vein of Steven Levy's (1984) original
definition of the rise of the movement in the computer centers of MIT
and Stanford in the 1960s and 1970s, and the illegal and anti-social
activities of others. However, this acknowledg es that some of the
"pranks" of the early hackers would clearly not be sanctioned under
later legislation and heightened awareness of security infrin gements.
Additionally, some activities fall into a gray area between what is
legal and what is not. Eric Raymond (2001), High Priest of the Open
Source Software move ment and hacker extraordinaire, is keen to
emphasize the distinction between " hacker" as benignly motivated
programming enthusiast and "cracker" as progra mmer outlaw. Although it
is beyond the remit of this essay to offer an extensive elaboration of
the difference, the hacker/cracker distinction must be recogniz ed, as
both are of interest in ethical terms, and especially in relation to
gender . Hence the remainder of this account will encompass both
categories. Unfortunat ely the hacker/cracker terminology does not seem
to have been widely adopted and, certainly within media reports,
"hacking" is often used for illegal activity; legal hacking appears to
be of less interest to the media. This use of the term "hacking" is not
confined to the broadcast and print med ia as Paul Taylor's (1999)
recent academic study of hackers concentrates on the IT underworld.
Therefore, in what follows, it appears to be wise to let the sources
make their own definitions and to follow these as far as possible.

MALE DOMINATION OF HACKING


There is a considerable literature on the relatively low numbers of
women present in all aspects of computing and IT, except for office ,
administrative and secretarial roles where women predominate (Webster,
1996). This focus has been so strong that it has tended to dominate
research on gende r and IT and it is hard to dispel the notion that the
gender and IT question is largely a numbers game. As Lancaster (2003)
explains, assuming that equal numb ers of women and men in IT spells
equality, is a trap for the unwary. Women may be present in a work or
educational setting in considerable numbers (e.g. in offices) and yet
still be in a disadvantaged position as they are at low level s in the
hierarchy. This suggests that programs which attempt to draw women into
areas where they are in a minority e.g. science and engineering, are
unlikely to be successful if they base themselves on publicity campaigns
without unders tanding the deeper reasons why women are absent in the
first place.
Given these concerns it would not be surprising to find that hacking is
also dominated by men. As it is strongly linked to identifying with ICTs
and techno logy we should expect to find that is predominantly a male
preserve and thus is bor ne out by major studies (Taylor, 1999).
However, leaving statistics to the side for a moment, I argue that there
are additional features of the male dominance of the hacking phenomenon
which are just as important in the analysis. It is instructive to
characterize women's absence or presence in the world of hackin g by
comparison with what is written on women in more traditional aspects of
com puting. This serves to focus the analysis on finding what may be
intrinsically differe nt about hacking in gender terms, rather than
rehearsing arguments which may be common to gender and ICTs, in general,
and therefore which will not get to the heart of the gender question in
the hacker phenomenon. Features of such a comp arison include media and
academic interest in women hackers and explanations for thei r presence
and absence. Do such explanations differ, in significant ways, from
discussions of traditional computing roles? For instance, we could
consider media portrayals of women hackers and how these are different
from accounts of prominent women in IT in education and industry.
A second, less obvious, point for comparison involves comparing the
desirabili ty of women entering computing and the desirability of women
entering hacking. Much of the discussion on women's absence from
computing ultimately leads back to the question of how to attract more
women into the discipline. Often the desirability of attracting more
women into computing is not examined; it is accepted as fairly obvious
that it is desirable to get women into interesting, well paid jobs which
are usually (barring periodic recessions) fairly plentifu l. However it
should be noted that the argument for getting more women into compu ting
is often economic, relating to industry shortages rather than in terms
of givi ng women better career opportunities (Henwood, 1993). There is
no parallel argume nt for a shortage of hackers. Hence we would not
expect to find similar rhetoric surrounding the idea of getting more
women into hacking and yet the merit of more women becoming hackers has
indeed been raised (Sollfrank 2001). Exploring this, in terms of women's
complex and ambiguous relationships with ICTs, means that we need not
subscribe to a stereotyped view of women as technophobes, who must be
persuaded and cajoled into using ICTs. This also suggests that we may
need to update our views on hacking, which again may be rather that we
need more sophisticated ways of exploring men's and women's changing
relationships with technology.

THE FEMALE HACKER - PRESENCE OR ABSENCE COMPARED TO IT IN GEN ERAL


Taylor (1999) notes the fundamentally masculine nature of hacking.
Hacking culture is young, male, technologically oriented, and on the
margins of the computing industry. Against one of the major tenets of
the &quo t;hacker ethic," namely the assertion that there should be no
discrimination on the grounds of "bogus" criteria (Levy 1984; 41) of
age, class, race etc., Taylor (ibid.:32) finds the absence of women
hackers to be an "unex plained statistic." He focuses on the traditional
factors discouraging women from computing, namely social stereotyping,
masculine "locker room" envir onment and gender bias in computing
language, and applies these to the hacker phenome non. Importantly he
notes that, even if we take all the traditional deterrent facto rs into
account, given the fraction of women with computing qualifications and
therefore with the technical skills to become hackers, statistically we
would expect to see more women hackers. So if there are fewer than
expected, this suggests that there are further factors operating.
In his empirical study of hackers, respondents found it difficult to
identify the reasons why there are fewer women hackers than might be
expected, tending to offer arguments based on psychological mastery.
Taylor (1999; 36) suggests that whilst such arguments can be
biologically deterministic, "they at least offer a succinct explanation
for the statistical expectation yet non-app earance of female hackers."
However he is not totally convinced by simple argumen ts, pointing
instead towards the Wild West brand of masculinity portrayed in hacke r
culture, the misogyny displayed by men who can hide behind the anonymity
of the Internet and the association of technology with desire, eroticism
and arti ficial creation. These are certainly arguments which other
authors have drawn upon in their analysis of gender relations in ICTs.
For instance, Susan Herring's (1996) research on gendered computer
mediated communications suggests that gen dered stereotypes are often
magnified in electronic communication with men more like ly to flame and
women more likely to use supportive styles of speech. The link between
technology and artificial creation, through artificial intelligence and
artificial life, and how this relates to masculinity has been noted by a
number of authors (Adam, 1998: Helmreich, 1994: Kember, 2003).
I agree that these two points in Taylor's analysis, misogynistic, often
anonym ous, communication and artificial creation are implicated in
gender relations in ICTs. However, given the point, made above, that we
need to find what it is about hacking that demarcates it from the "women
in computing" issue in general, it is hard to see how they can act as
convincing explanations for the relative absence of women in hacking
over and above women's presence or absence in computing in overall
terms; there seems to be nothing special to connect them unequivocally
to the hacker phenomenon. However, given that the "Wild West" or
frontier spirit does not appear not be a significant metaphor in
mainstream computing (most of us do not regard our day at the offi ce in
terms of patrolling the Electronic Frontier with a cyberposse, for
instance ), it would be reasonable to explore the concept of the
frontier with the expecta tion that it may prove a more potent
explanatory device.

Frontiers


For instance, the idea of a frontier, and more specifically the "wild
west" frontier is a potent metaphor for Internet commentat ors who have
often conceptualized the Internet as an "electronic frontier.&qu ot;
(Brail, 1996; Kramer & Kramarae, 1997; Ludlow, 1996; Sterling, 1992).
Joan ne Hitchcock (Mingo, 2000) and Stephanie Brail (1996), both of whom
were stalked on the Internet, explicitly use the idea of the frontier in
the description of their stalking cases. The acknowledgement of a
geographical frontier may imply that expectations of behavior might be
different there and that normal standards of justice and law might not
apply. But if the Internet is an electr onic frontier then, by analogy,
the special justice of the frontier goes beyond the normal notions of
justice. Living on the frontier is different from ordinary life in many
ways, not least of all because as the frontier may be disputed or even
under attack. Special measures must be taken against those who attack
that frontier. Normal forms of justice may not apply as one may be
geographica lly far from the forces and institutions which could enforce
law and justice. Ther efore the idea of "frontier justice" arises with
the implication that just ice, perhaps, may be taken into the hands of
those defending the frontier who may be far away physically, or here
virtually, from the normal channels of law and order. It is not clear
how far this metaphor can be extended, nor should it be used to excuse
hacking activity which is illegal and harmful. Nevertheless some of the
victims of cyberstalking, who see themselves very much in terms of
living on the electronic frontier have had to take the question of
justice into their own hands e.g. as in the Hitchcock case, where she
describes enlist ing the help of a "volunteer cyberposse" in order to
bring to book those who were stalking her (Mingo, 2000).
John Perry Barlow, credited with coining the phrase "Electronic
Frontier& quot; and co- founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
clearly revels in the parallels between the electronic frontier and the
19th century American west "in its natural preference for social devices
which emerge from it (sic) conditions rather than those which are
imposed from outside." (Barlow, 1996; 27). Until the West was
"civilized", he argues, there existed and unwritten code of the West
which was fluid and emphasized ethics and under standings over largely
unenforceable laws. Justice is seen as an emergent property of the
electronic frontier. "Uncodified or adaptive 'law,' while as 'fast,
loose, and out of control' as other emergent forms, is probably more
likely to yield something like justice at this point. In fact, one can
already see in development new practices to suit the conditions of
virtual commerce. The life forms of information are evolving methods to
protect their continued repr oduction." (ibid., 28)
More generally, frontiers and frontier justice, including electronic
varieties , resonate with Mary Douglas's (1966) classic anthropological
work on boundaries and margins. Much of this work researches the
distinction between sacred and profane and the pollution which occurs
when the boundary between the two is transgressed. But a second aspect,
here more relevant, relates to what happens in the very boundaries or
margins themselves. We make boundaries or frontiers to create social
order. In making social order we are not just condemning diso rder - we
are recognizing that disorder is both dangerous and, at the same time,
potent. (ibid., 94) For instance, someone who goes beyond the ordinary
limits of society, and who comes back may possess a power not available
to those who have remained in control of themselves and within the
bounds of society.
This suggests that those whose position in society is marginal enjoy an
indefi nable status even though they may be doing nothing morally wrong.
Douglas suggests that examples can be found in the unborn child or the
perceived transition fro m childhood to adulthood in some societies. To
be in a marginal condition is to be in a dangerous condition but it is
also a source of power. So those at the frontier, on the margins, are
dangerous and marginal as they are beyond social order, for the US
pioneers some were literally "outlaws."
People who hold specific offices in society have well-defined powers by
dint of that office, but those in the margins may also hold power,
albeit of an unc onscious and uncontrollable nature. Hence hackers, and
those at the electronic frontier have power clearly not because of some
well respected societal position, but rather because of the power and
danger imbued in their marginality. The unstru ctured areas of society
contain energy in the margins, albeit of a potentially danger ous kind.
Frontiers are, of course, a special kind of boundary. A frontier is a
boundary between the known and the unknown where the unknown is a
dangerous place. But, at the same time, it is a seductive place.
Kramer and Kramarae (1997) point to the way that anarchy and frontiers
have often been linked historically, especially in US history. In the
on-line world these are also linked as shown by hackers' rejection of
authority, emphasis on freedom and delight in the "wilderness and
excitement" (ibid., 232) of the Internet. Although Taylor (1999) does
not elaborate, in detail, why the frontier spirit might serve to exclude
women, Kramer and Kramarae poin t to more specific reasons. Although the
US pioneers of the frontier were men and women, "…the prevailing story
is that the frontier was conquered by strong white male heroes…The
frontier is the promise of new beginnings . It is male, adventure,
boldness, daring, restless energy, independence, rough, violence,
strength, heroic exploits, and danger. It is not female, intimacy,
caring, vulnerability, meaning in daily customs, or artistic." (ibid.,
231) Kramer and Kramarae (ibid., 232-233) argue that, just as historians
of the frontier represented women in stereotyped ways e.g. "Brave
Pioneer Mothers" or "Calamity Janes" without acknowledging their multid
imensional contributions in making new societies, so do the documents of
the electronic frontier, the popular magazines or 'zines, in
representing women as passive sexual stereotypes, deny and obscure
present day women's roles in making the new electronic societies. We can
see how the valorizing of the frontier spirit can serve to celebrate
masculinity and underestimate or render invisible women 's contribution
in accounts of hacking.
However if we characterize this phenomenon more squarely in terms of the
conce pt, "frontier masculinity," based on what has been said above on
frontie rs and borders, we can begin to analyze the forces at work in
shaping the culture of hacking in gender terms, without demonizing
hackers. Despite the pervasiven ess of Wild West and frontier narratives
in cyberspace and hacking texts, few auth ors apart from Kramer and
Kramarae (1997) have chosen to explore this myth in gend er terms.
Miller (1995) argues against the usefulness of the frontier metaphor:
"Just as the ideal of chastity makes virginity sexually provocative, so
does the unclaimed territory invite settlers, irresistibly so. Americans
regar d the lost geographical frontier with a melancholy, voluptuous
fatalism - we had no choice but to advance upon it and it had no
alternative but to submit." ; (Miller, 1995; 51)
Although we may resist the apparent inevitability of the frontier myth
and the brand of masculinity that goes with it, Richard Slotkin (1998)
argues for the pervasiveness of the frontier myth in the popular imagery
of American life. This emphasizes a certain kind of hero, a rugged,
hard-headed masculine, white hero who is engaged in a war against nature
but is also engaged in a racial war, the war against those who must be
civilized in Western terms.
We can see this brand of frontier masculinity at work in popular
accounts of hacking, where not only is the hacker's mastery over savage
nature (the comput er and the program) celebrated but so too is the
hacker's disdain for the prevail ing norms of society. It is as if
societal norms are the culture of a world not civilized in hacker terms,
and hackers are celebrated in overcoming these &quo t;uncivilized" norms
which include such things as finishing college degrees, sleeping and wor
king at normal times, paying appropriate attention to personal hygiene
and appearan ce and not tampering with the hardware and software of
computers etc. If we don an anthropological hat for a moment and regard
hacker culture, in preaching the hacker ethic, as the hope of this new
civilized world at the frontier, we can regard the old world as
"uncivilized" in hacker terms. This requ ires us to suspend, or even
stand on its head, our belief in how we usually regard the
civilized/uncivilized spectrum. The business of making the "normal&qu
ot; world seem strange can be a useful explanatory device. Those who
subscribe to these "uncivilized" norms then become the "savages" in the
hacker frontier world either ignored or waiting to be civilized.
Unsurprisingl y many of these will be women as they subscribe to many of
the rituals of the non-hacker world. They may be civilized or ignored
but are inevitable cast as "other" in relation to the hacker world.
Hence, we can see that the frontier myth with all its ramifications does
not serve women well in the elec tronic world. The idea of the frontier
resonates, in some fundamental way, with an heroic view of masculinity.
Other than the marginal roles articulated by Krame r and Kramarae
(1997), it is not clear how women could carve themselves a simila rly
important role against the frontier metaphor. Indeed women may not just
be mar ginalized, they may be almost invisible.
The use of the frontier myth to make women invisible can be seen at work
in Steven Levy's (1984) Hackers, the earliest substantial work on the
hacker phen omenon. It is an eloquent description of the frontier
masculinity of the early hacker world and has been immensely important
in raising awareness of the history of hacking. Levy was one of the
first commentators to question the paucity of wom en hackers. He notes,
"Even the substantial cultural bias against women gett ing into serious
computing does not explain the utter lack of female hackers." ; (ibid.,
84) Yet, apparently without irony, this quote is juxtaposed with the
observation that "hackers talked strangely, they had bizarre hours, they
ate weird food, and they spent all their time thinking about computers"
(ibid.) and a long, and unfortunately detailed, description of one
hacker's personal hygiene problems! More importantly, even taking into
account women's actual physical presence in hacking activities, Levy is
unaware of the way in which his text renders women invisible. The Who's
Who at the beginning of the book includes three women, fifty two men and
ten computers. Some of the comput es are described in terms of their
relationship to men (e.g. Apple II and Steve Wozniak) but all of the
women are someone's wives. Hence women, if they do app ear, are defined
in terms of their relationship to men, even when they have expert
hacking credentials. Women are, therefore, largely invisible.
A description of an episode involving a woman and programming
demonstrates how women are cast as "other." Despite the fact that this
woman, Margare t Hamilton, was an expert programmer, she went on to
manage the computers on boa rd the space craft of the Apollo moonshot,
she is designated by the pejorative term, "Officially Sanctioned User"
(ibid., 96-97). At MIT, she used the official assembly level language
supplied on the DEC machine, not the hack er-written language which had
been developed by the MIT hacking group. So, when the hacke rs of the
"Midnight Computer Wiring Society" altered the hardware of the DEC
machine one night to run their own programs, hers failed to work the
next day. Naturally she complained and hardware alterations were
officially banned, although in practice, eventually tolerated. The
episode was designated the "Great Margaret Hamilton Program Clobber."
(ibid., 97) Note how the hacker frontier spirit differs from Margaret
Hamilton's world. Although she clearly has programming expertise, and
therefore could be expected to achi eve some measure of respect, she is
an official user, thereby belonging to the &qu ot;savage" official world
which is the antithesis of hacking. She uses the despised offic ial
programming language. She keeps daytime hours, rather than joining the
nocturn al world of the hackers. Her complaint and the subsequent
banning of nocturnal hardware alterations, although initially upheld,
gradually reverts to the stat us quo. The hackers are described as
"playful" and the incident is cast as a prank.

THE HUNT FOR THE WOMAN HACKER


Rather than purely pondering reasons for their absence, som e
commentators have deliberately sought out women hackers. Paul Edwards
(2003) describes how he initially followed Levy (1984), Weizenbaum
(1976) and Turkle (1984) in assuming that hacking was an almost
exclusively masculine activity. He argues that the stereotypical
masculinity of hacking is beginning to break down with a sizeable female
minority in many hacker communities. This is accom panied by portrayals
of women hackers in cyberpunk science fiction and as film charac ters.
Partly in the spirit of recovering women's history, which is attempted
in othe r disciplines, such as art and literature (Rowbotham, 1973),
Edwards (2003; 12) sent out an enquiry looking for women hackers on a
number of Internet mailing lists and was surprised to get nearly a
hundred responses within a few days. He had not defined the term in his
initial email, the respondents had identifi ed themselves as women
hackers. Interestingly Edwards also asked a number of seni or male
computer scientists for names of women hackers in the 1960s and half a
dozen names were immediately forthcoming. In many ways these results
seem surp rising and Edwards, himself, struggles to explain them. It
could be an example of the "hidden from history" phenomenon (Rowbotham,
1973) where women have always been present in some arena e.g. art,
literature or science, but where their activities have been suppressed,
ignored or attributed to men within the patriarchal structures of public
life and where the feminist historian's job is to reclaim women's
history. However we also need to consider how we would verify a
subject's claims to be a woman hacker if contact is only made through email.
Edwards (2003) hints that the changing material environment of hacking
may hav e made a difference to the presence or absence of women hackers.
Early batch pro cessing on large mainframes required presence late at
night in the computer center, "the graveyard shift", as resources were
scarce. This encouraged muc h face-to-face interaction at strange times
of day, and of necessity in the comp uter center, and may have
reinforced the tiny communities of hackers as male preser ves. However
as computing moved into time-sharing and then into fully networked mod e
these physical factors, which may have previously deterred women, were
no long er present. However we need to be wary of assuming that the move
to the virtual necessarily opens up hitherto masculine domains to women
as several authors argue that stereotypical male-female interactions can
be magnified on the Inte rnet (Brail, 1996: Herring, 1996). This ties in
with the discussion on egalitarian communities later in the paper.
Changes in material conditions may facilitate social changes on some
level but they are not enough to cause changing social relations.
Cornelia Sollfrank (1999) sees her search for women hackers as a
"mission to locate subversive women on the net." In looking for women
hackers she attended several hacker conferences; although there were
women there they did not identify themselves as hackers. She found it
almost impossible to find any at all. Her respondents from law
enforcement officials to cyberpunk authors all cited differences in
masculine and feminine psychology to explain the lack of women hackers.
During this period of research, the only female hacker she came across
was Susan Thunders who took up prostitution to fuel her need to buy
high-tech equipment for hacking, became a security adviser and then
embark ed on a career as a professional poker player. As Sollfrank
notes: "Sex, cri me and technology all came together in the person of
Susan Thunders." Nevert heless as she further points out, "constructing
the image of a women hacker who is actually a whore fits perfectly into
the convention of discrediting hackers by referring to their
psychological deficiencies and immorality, and by imputi ng criminal
reasons to what they are doing." In her first paper, Sollfrank's (1999)
conclusion is clearly at odds with that of Edwards as she argues that,
of all technical spheres, hacking contains fewest women. Sollfrank
(ibid.) hin ts at the potential for women to become engaged in
politically engaged work throu gh hacking, the kind of work which women
often prefer to engage in on a non-techn ological level. In later papers
(2000, 2002) Sollfrank has made contact with women hack ers, persuaded
them to give a workshop on "How to Become a Hacker" at a conference and
has consciously made a link between politically inspired cyberf eminism
and women hackers. In particular, Clara G. Sopht is an expert in "Denial
of Service" attacks, where networks can be brought down by flooding them
with more traffic than they can handle. This sort of activity has been
termed "hacktivism" or "electronic civil disobedience." The idea that
large corporations or even governments (e.g. as in the case of the
Mexica n government and the Zapatistas) could be disrupted by such means
currently exci tes much interest on the Internet. However the notion
that women could have a spec ial role to play in this has barely been
considered hence Sollfrank's (2002) plea for tactics to "…undermine the
fact, that the hacking culture is a purely white male phenomenon, and to
populate this environment with loads of dangerous and idealistic women
hackers…"

A FEMALE HACKER ETHIC
Are Hacker Communities Egalitarian?


The above discussion paints a complex and ambivalent pictur e with
regard to women's involvement in hacking. Clearly the area is still
under -researched, particularly with regard to the political dimension
and especially areas such as hacktivism. Nevertheless enough evidence
exists to challenge the notion tha t hacker communities are largely
meritocracies where race, gender etc, are unimp ortant. Indeed we might
question how such a rhetoric of equality arose in the first place. Part
of the answer may lie in the way that hackers cast themselves as a new,
alternative political movement challenging the existing order with all
its baggage of racism, sexism and repression. However just because a
political movement challenges a non-egalitarian orthodoxy, this does not
mean that it is free from the instruments of oppression itself. And this
would be especiall y problematic for hackers, where they are so loosely
organized along the politic al dimension. The related notion that
democracy is a spontaneous property of new Internet communities has been
criticized by many authors (Adam, 2002b; Ess 199 6; Rheingold 1997,
Winner, 1997). Similarly we should note that it has been claim ed that
new occupational groups escape sexist attitudes because they are not
entr enched in old traditions. Indeed this claim has been made in regard
to computing and information systems (Igbaria and Chidambaram, 1997)
but, again has been subjec t to challenge (Adam, Howcroft and
Richardson, 2001). The point here is that equ ality and democracy are
not spontaneously emergent properties of new communities whe ther they
be political and occupational groups and it would seem to be more
effecti ve if we stopped expecting them to be so.

The Equal Opportunities Ethic


Levy (1984; 43) details a central tenet of the hacker ethic . "Hackers
should be judged by their hacking, not bogus criteria such as degrees,
age, race, or position." Interestingly the categories "gend er" and
"able bodiedness" are absent though it would be reasonable to conclude
that "such as" could include these categories. "This meritocratic trait
was not necessarily rooted in the inherent goodness of hack er hearts -
it was mainly that hackers cared less about someone's superficial cha
racteristics than they did about his (sic) potential to advance the
general state of hackin g" Levy (ibid.) cites the example of a twelve
year-old boy being accepted into hacker circles, though we might note
that such an individual is only just outs ide the college aged white,
male category that made up the bulk of Levy's hackers. Indeed just by
growing a little older this boy would inevitably fit the standa rd
hacker characteristics in ways in which a middle-aged black woman could
never do! This is a typical liberal expression of equality, rather in
the vein of the employment adverts which claim equal opportunities
regardless of ethnicity , disability, gender, religion etc. A statement
of equality is seen to be enough to achieve it. This view also tends to
dismiss as superficial (here the term used is even stronger "bogus"),
characteristics of people, character istics which are far from
superficial but are deeply felt, often regarded as positive , aspects of
their identities, and which should be respected rather than diminis hed
or dismissed. Under this "differences as bogus" view, equal opportun
ities are then passive instruments, difference and diversity are not
identified, and one need do nothing to achieve equality except state a
belief in it.
More recent views of equal opportunities which are becoming encoded in
legisla tion in Western counties place a much more active role upon the
shoulders of actant s, For instance note how a college would now be seen
as defaulting if it claimed to offer equal opportunity to disabled
students yet its library was a two floo r building without elevators and
its lecture theaters contained many steep steps . In addition to
ignoring differences in identity, ignoring the material conditi ons of
difference also makes it much easier to claim equality. For instance
factor s such as some women's inability to work in computer centers late
at night becau se of childcare, persons from ethnic minorities
reluctance to work at night for fear of attacks on dimly lit campuses in
seedy areas perhaps where there are undercurrents of racial tension,
disabled hackers inability to use public tran sport or access buildings
without ramps or elevators- all these can be set to one side. It could
be argued that some of the material factors I adduce here could have
been problematic for early hacking in the 1960s and 1970s, when the
hacke r ethic was formulated, but are less of an issue in contemporary
networked times . Edwards (2003) hints at the idea of hacking becoming
more available to women when they no longer had to be present late at
night in computer centers. Howev er, as I argue above, making things
materially less difficult does not necessarily change the prevailing
culture and is not an active measure to draw in women. This has been a
prevailing theme in feminist ethics (Tong, 1993). It also hark s back to
the idea, described in the previous section, that Internet communities
spontaneously become democratic, a myth effectively dispelled by Langdon
Winne r (1997) in his critique of virtual communities.

The Freedom of Information Ethic
"All information should be free." (Levy, 1984; 40)

Freedom of information has been a central plank of the hacker ethic
since hacker communities began to form in the 1960s. This mirrors the
wider emphasis on freedom of speech prevalent in most Western
democracies, par ticularly so in the USA where it is constitutionally
enshrined in the First Amendment. It is immediately clear how this ethic
could be at loggerheads with feminist concerns when we consider the
debates over pornography and censorship, particu larly in North America,
and mainly in the off-line world, though now extending to consider
pornography in cyberspace (Adam, 2002a). In feminist legal research, and
feminist thinking in general, there has been a long running debate over
pornography, crystallizing round deeply felt beliefs over freedom of
speech versus censorship. On the one hand Nadine Strossen and ACLU
defend freedom of expression, seemingly at all costs. On the other,
Catharine MacKinnon and Andr ea Dworkin lead the "anti-pornography"
feminist position (Lane, 2001). Additionally there is a widespread tacit
acknowledgement that pornography is the driver of much of the
development of Internet technologies, although due to its underground
nature this is difficult to quantify. The debates are compl ex, far from
conclusive and a detailed discussion of the many details is outwith the
scope of this paper.
However, for present purposes, the salient features of the debate relate
to the freedom of information ethic and how it relates to freedom of
speech/censo rship debates in hacker terms. There is little doubt that
organizations such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and prominent
exponents of the hacker ethic and freedom in cyberspace have a political
influence. Additionally there are speci fic instances of hacker
involvement in legislative processes, which do have implic ations for
the freedom of speech/censorship debates particularly insofar as they
rela te to feminist concerns over pornography. Hackers have been
involved in political action to effect in relation to Internet
legislation. As Raymond (2001; 17) notes:
"The mainstreaming of the Internet even brought the hacker culture the
beginnings of respectability and political clout. In 1994 and 1995
hacker acti vism scuppered the Clipper proposal which would have put
strong encryption under government control. In 1996 hacker mobilized a
broad coalition to defeat the misnamed '"Communications Decency Act'
(CDA) and prevent censorship of the Internet."
In fact the "broad coalition" designating themselves the Citizens
Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC, 1997) consisted of various
Internet serv ice providers, broadcast and media associations, civil
liberties groups and over 56,000 individual Internet users. Although
designed to protect minors from ind ecent and offensive material on the
Internet, the successful challenge was made on the grounds that the CDA
failed to understand the unique nature of the Interne t and that it was
so broad as to violate the freedom of speech protections of the First
Amendment. We should also note the subsequent dismissal of the Child
Pornography Prevention Act (Levy, 2002) which means that virtual
pictures of children are not illegal in the USA.
This implies that there is now an urgent need to move the feminist
debate on pornography and censorship from the off-line world, where much
has been said and written, to the on-line world where there has, so far,
been little debate. However there is some evidence that a female hacker
ethic may differ from the male hacker ethic in respect of aspects of
freedom of speech and pornography. Sollfrank (2002) calls for a
consciously political cyberfeminism for women hac kers. Interestingly
some prominent women hackers have explicitly sought to crusade against
Internet pornography so it is here where we may find the seeds of an
alternative female hacker ethic. For instance, Natasha Grigori started
out in the 1990s running a bulletin board for software pirates, but has
now founded and runs antichildporn.org where hackers skills are used to
track down child pornography and pass the information to law enforcement
authorities (Segan 200 0a). Similarly a women hacker handled,
"Blueberry" set up another anti-ch ild pornography organization,
condemned.org (ibid.). Jude Milhon, a hacker who ini tiated the
alternative magazine, Mondo 2000, argues that women hackers are more
likel y to be involved in hacktivism with a political or ethical end
that in other are as of illegal hacking (Segan, 2000b). Hence there is
some, albeit still slender, evidence of the emergence of a different
ethic amongst female hackers, one whe re political activism is to the
fore and where explicit stances and action are taken on topics such as
child pornography rather than holding to an ideal of freedom of speech
at all cost. Needless to say the evidence for this is still tenuous and
more research is needed.

The Work Ethic


Levy's (1984) work on early hackers does not explicitly des cribe the
hacker ethic as a work ethic. Nevertheless from the importance of the
adop tion of very particular working habits, there is a clearly implied
hacker work ethi c. This theme has been explored in more detail by Pekka
Himanen (2001). Himanen argues that the hacker ethic is a new work ethic
that challenges the Protestan t work ethic of Max Weber's (1904-5)
classic text, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, which
has dominated Western capitalist societies for so long. Here the hacker
ethic is a passionate, joyful, playful approach to work where making
money is not the driving force and where access and freedom of
expression are explicitly enshrined in the ethic. This contrasts with
the Prot estant work ethic's emphasis on work as moral and originally
religious duty, where play and leisure are clearly contrasted with work.
Hackers' relationship to time is important and different to the "time is
money" ethic of capi talism which has intensified and speeded up in the
new information society (Castells, 1996). Even leisure becomes work as
we "work out" in the gym and mar shal our home lives in tight schedules,
as if the whole of our lives have become Taylorized. As Himanen (ibid.,
29) notes, no longer can we just hang out with our children, we are
obliged to spend quality time with them! The use of new technology can
blur the boundaries of work and leisure, not always to our adva ntage.
But Himanen argues that the hacker ethic advocates organizing for
playfulness, a freedom to self-organize time and resists work-time
supervision. Some hacker s make money through traditional capitalist
routes and then, having achieved fin ancial independence, are free to
pursue their hacker passions.
The hacker work ethic paints an ideal of freedom from financial worry
and the ability to organize one's own work which few, whether men or
women, can hope to achieve even in affluent Western democracies.
However, from the point of view of the present paper we need to question
whether there is a gender dimens ion, both in terms of desirability and
feasibility, lurking within the hacker work ethic. Studies of women,
work and leisure (Green et al, 1990) suggest that wom en's access to
leisure is different from that of men's; they have less of it. So far it
seems that patterns of leisure use of information and communications
technologies and the Internet reproduce standard gendered patterns of
leisure time availability rather than breaking them down (Adam and
Green, 1998). In addition, many women work a "double shift" i.e. they
have primary responsibility for home and child care as well as their
paid employment. Comme ntators on the economy of the household can be
surprisingly blind to the contribution that women make by their largely
invisible labor of looking after homes, bodie s and children (Cudd,
2001, 92-94). Those whose life revolves around the compute r may not
notice the real life bodily care that goes into keeping them fed, clea n
and organized for their virtual lives within the machine (Helmreich,
1994). We might feel that the accelerated version of the Protestant work
ethic is pro blematic for men and for women. Yet, at the same time, the
hacker work ethic is unachie vable for many men and women in Western
democracies whose material conditions will not permit the freedoms to
which hackers aspire. But on top of this the hacker work ethic seems
especially problematic for women as women's time is often so
circumscribed. The hacker work ethic is no means of acknowledging this
and the special position of women's bodily labor in maintaining the
machinery of every day life. This suggests that there is another
dimension where an alternative female version of the hacker ethic, yet
to be formulated, but which is now ima ginable.

CONCLUSION


In this paper I have sought to explore the phenomenon of the woman
hacker along a number of dimensions. This includes the search for women
hackers and why their presence or absence should be of concern. The expl
anations which have been generated to explain women's relative absence
from hacking are seen as more of interest than the actual number of
women involved and I have argued that the concept of "frontier
masculinity" is worthy of more attention. One of Levy's (1984) anecdotes
about a woman programmer is reread against the frontier metaphor. The
few published sources that exist do not yet give us a clear picture of
how many women hackers there are and the spectrum of their activities.
Turning more explicitly to the tenets of hacker ethics I have sought to
analyz e these in terms of the egalitarian claim for hacker communities,
the equal oppo rtunities ethic, the freedom of information ethic and the
work ethic. The discussion abo ve suggests that all of these have a
gender dimension which can, in some circumst ances, be problematic for
women in particular. Importantly the supposed egalitarian nature of
hacker communities and their claim to be meritocracies which ignore
"bogus" criteria such as age or race tend to repeat the old liberal
arguments for equality which feminists and others have discredited as
passive instruments which maintain the status quo in their denial of
difference. Simil arly there seems to be little hope that the hacker
work ethic has much to offer man y men and women, but particularly women
whose work and leisure time is so constr ained. Within the freedom of
information ethic we need a more thoroughgoing explorati on of how
feminist debates on censorship vs. freedom of speech translate into the
on-line world. But at least here we see some signs of an emerging women
hacker s' ethic where hacking skills can be put to use for more
conscious political ends in hacktivism and anti-child pornography
websites and enforcement. In tracking down women hackers we must attend
to the latter point especially as there is hope of sowing the seeds of a
more inclusive and politically rounded hacker ethic.

REFERENCES


Adam, A. (1998) Artificial knowing: Gender and the thinking machine.
Routledge, London and New York.
Adam, A. (2001a) Gender and computer ethics, in Readings in CyberEthics
(eds. R. Spinello and H. Tavani), Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury MA, 63-76.
Adam, A. (2001b) Computer ethics in a different voice. Information and
Organiz ation, 11, 235-62.
Adam, A. (2002a) Cyberstalking and Internet pornography: Gender and the
gaze. Ethics and Information Technology, 4 (2), 133-42.
Adam, A. (2002b) Democracy, Gender and Technology: Historical
Connections, in Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Cultural
Attitudes Towards Tech nology and Communication( CATaC) (eds. F.
Sudweeks and C. Ess) , Montreal, 143-51.
Adam, A. and Green, E. (1998) On-line leisure: Gender and ICTs in the
home. Information, Communication and Society, 1 (3), 291-312.
Adam, A., Howcroft, D. and Richardson, H. (2001) Absent Friends? The
Gender Dimension in IS Research." in Realigning Research and Practice in
Informa tion Systems Development: The Social and Organizational
Perspective ( eds N.L. Russ o, B. Fitzgerald and J. I. DeGross), Kluwer,
Norwell MA and Dordrecht, 333-352.*Barlow, J.P.(1996) Selling Wine
Without Bottles: The Economy of Mind on the Global Net in High Noon on
the Electronic Frontier: Conceptual Issues in Cyber space (ed. P.
Ludlow), MIT Press, Cambridge MA and London, 9-34.
Brail, S. (1996) The price of admission: Harassment and free speech in
the wil d, wild west, in wired_women: Gender and new realities in
cyberspace (eds. L .Che rny, L. and E. Wise ), Seal Press, Seattle, WA,
141-57.
Castells, M. (1997) The information age: economy, society and culture.
Vol. 1 The rise of the network society. Blackwell, Malden MA.
CIEC (1997) The Internet is not a Television, available at
http://www.ciec.org , 20th January, 2003.
Cudd, A. (2001) Objectivity and Ethno-Feminist Critiques of Science in
After the Science Wars (eds .K. Ashman and P. Baringer), Routledge, 80-97.
Douglas, M. (1966) Purity and danger: an analysis of the concepts of
pollution and taboo, London and New York, Ark.
Edwards, P. (2003) Nerd Worlds: Computer hackers, unofficial culture and
mascu line identities, unpublished paper, Program in Science, Technology
and Society, Sta nford University, Stanford, CA
Ess, C. 1996, The political computer: Democracy, CMC, and Habermas, in
Philoso phical Perspectives on Computer-Mediated Communication ( ed. C.
Ess ), State Universi ty of New York Press, Albany, N.Y,197-230.
Green, E., Hebron, S. and Woodward, D. (1990) Women's leisure, what
leisure? Basingstoke, Macmillan Education.
Helmreich, S. (1994) Anthropology inside and outside the looking-glass
worlds of artificial life, unpublished paper, Department of
Anthropology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Henwood, Flis (1993) Gender perspectives on information technology:
problems, issues and opportunities, in Gendered by Design? Information
Technology and Office Systems (eds. Green, E. Owen J. and Pain, D.),
Taylor and Francis, Lond on, 31-49.
Herring, S. (1996) Posting in a different voice: gender and ethics in
CMC, in Philosophical Perspectives on Computer-Mediated Communication
(ed. C. Ess) , State University of New York Press, Albany, N.Y., 115-45.
Himanen, P. (2001)The hacker ethic and the spirit of the information
age. Seck er & Warburg, London.
Igbaria, M. and Chidambaram, M. (1997) The impact of gender on career
success of information systems professionals. Information Technology and
People, 10 (1), 63-86.
Kember, S. (2003) Cyberfeminism and artificial life. Routledge, London
an New York.
Kramer, J. & Kramarae, C. (1997). Gendered ethics on the Internet, in
Comm unication ethics in an age of diversity (eds. J. Makau and R.
Arnett), University of Ill inois Press, Urbana, IL and Chicago, IL, 226-43.
Lancaster, A.-M. (2003) Acknowledging the significance of gender,
available at
http://www.southernct.edu/organizations/rcss/resources/adap_tech/equity_acc
ess/lancaster/intro.html, 20th January, 2003.
Lane, F. (2000) Obscene profits: the Entrepreneurs of pornography in the
cyber age, Routledge, New York and London.
Levy, S. (1984) Hackers. heroes of the computer revolution. Penguin,
Harmondsw orth UK.
Levy, N. (2002) Virtual child pornography: the eroticization of
inequality, Ethics and Information Technology, 4 (4), 319-323.
Ludlow, P. (ed.) (1996). High noon on the electronic frontier:
Conceptual issu es in cyberspace MIT Press, Cambridge MA and London.
Miller L. (1995) Women and children first: Gender and the settling of
the elec tronic frontier, in Resisting the Virtual Life: The Culture and
Politics of Informati on (eds. J. Brooks and I. Boal), City Lights, San
Francisco, 49-57.
Mingo, J. (2000) Caught in the net: an online posse tracks down an
Internet stalker, available at
http://www.houston-press.com/extra/cyberstalk.html (24 March 2000).
Raymond, E. (2001) The cathedral and the bazaar: Musings on Linux and
open sou rce by an accidental revolutionary. O'Reilly, Sebastopol, CA.
Rheingold, H.: 1993, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Virtual
Fronti er, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Rowbotham, S. (1973) Hidden from history; 300 years of women's
oppression and the fight against it. Pluto, London.
Segan, S. (2000a) Female of the species; hacker women are few but
strong, onli ne available at
http://more.abcnews.go.com/sections/tech/dailynews/hackerwomen000
602.html, 20th January, 2003.
Segan, S. (2000b) Facing a Man's World: Female hackers battle sexism to
get ahead, online available at
http://more.abcnews.go.com/sections/tech/dailynews/ hackerwomen000609
20th January, 2003
Slotkin, R. (1998) Gunfighter nation: the myth of the frontier in
twentieth-ce ntury America. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK.
Sollfrank, C. (1999) Women hackers - a report form the mission to locate
subve rsive women on the net, online available at
http://www.obn.org/hackers/text, 20th January, 2003.
Sollfrank, C. (2000) Unauthorized access: have code, will destroy!
Artbyte the magazine of digital arts & culture. online available at
http://www.artbyte .com/mag/Jul_aug_00/femalehackers_content.shtml
Sollfrank, C. (2002) Not every hacker is a woman, in Technics of
Cyberfeminism (eds. C. Reiche and A. Sick) online available
Sterling, B. (1992) The hacker crackdown: Law and disorder on the
electronic frontier. Viking, London.
Taylor, P. (1999) Hackers: Crime in the digital sublime. Routledge,
London and New York.
Tong, R. (1999). Feminist ethics, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 1999 Edition) (ed. E. Zalta), available at
http://plato.stanford.edu/arc hives/fall1999/entries/feminism-ethics/ ,
24th November, 1999.
Turkle, S. (1984)The second self: Computers and the human spirit. Simon
& Schuster, New York.
Weber, M. (1904-1905) The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.
Routl edge, London (trans. 1930, reprinted 1992).
Webster, J. (1996) Shaping women's work: Gender, employment and
information technology. Longmans, London.
Weizenbaum, J. (1976) Computer power and human reason: From judgement to
calcu lation. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.
Winner, L.(1997) Cyberlibertarian myths and the prospect for community,
ACM Computers and Society, 27 (3), 14-19.*
